[D1] Add new example to use D1 with Prisma ORM (#13618)
cloudflare/cloudflare-docs: content/d1/examples/d1-and-prisma-orm.md

Since you'll be using the [driver adapter](https://www.prisma.io/docs/orm/overview/databases/database-drivers#driver-adapters) feature which is currently in Preview, you need to explicitly enable it via  the `previewFeatures` field on the `generator` block.

Open your `schema.prisma` file and adjust the `generator` block to look as follows:

```diff
---
filename: prisma/schema.prisma
---
generator client {
  provider        = "prisma-client-js"
+	previewFeatures = ["driverAdapters"]
}
```

### 3. Create D1 database

In this step, you'll set up your D1 database. There generally are two approaches to this. Either using the Cloudflare Dashboard UI or via the `wrangler` CLI. You'll use the CLI in this tutorial.

Open your terminal and run the following command:

```
npx wrangler d1 create prisma-demo-db
```

If everything went well, you should see an output similar to this:

```
✅ Successfully created DB 'prisma-demo-db' in region EEUR
Created your database using D1's new storage backend. The new storage backend is not yet recommended for production workloads, but backs up your data via
point-in-time restore.

[[d1_databases]]
binding = "DB" # i.e. available in your Worker on env.DB

> database_name = "prisma-demo-db"

Author: Ah sorry I missed this 👍

Next, you'll create a database table in the database in order to be able to send some queries to D1 using Prisma ORM.

### 4. Create a table in the database

[Prisma Migrate](https://www.prisma.io/docs/orm/prisma-migrate/understanding-prisma-migrate/overview) doesn't support D1 yet, so you can't follow the "default" migration workflows using `prisma migrate dev` or `prisma db push`. However, the Prisma CLI provides tools that still allow you to generate SQL statements which you can then manually send to D1 via the `wrangler` CLI.

Open the `schema.prisma` file and add the following `User` model to it:

```diff
---
filename: prisma/schema.prisma
---
+model User {
+  id    Int     @id @default(autoincrement())
+  email String  @unique
+  name  String?
+}
```

Next, run the following command in your terminal to generate the SQL statement that creates a `User` table that's equivalent to the `User` model above:

```
npx prisma migrate diff --from-empty --to-schema-datamodel ./prisma/schema.prisma --script > prisma/schema.sql
```

> This stores a SQL statement to create a new `User` table in a new file called `schema.sql` in the `prisma` directory. Here's what it looks like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This stores a SQL statement to create a new `User` table in a new file called `schema.sql` in the `prisma` directory. Your `schema.sql` should look like this:
```

```sql
---
filename: prisma/schema.sql
---
-- CreateTable
CREATE TABLE "User" (
    "id" INTEGER NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT,
    "email" TEXT NOT NULL,
    "name" TEXT
);

> -- CreateIndex

Reviewer 2: helpful to explain why this index was autogenerated.

Author: added this note:

Note that the `UNIQUE INDEX` on the `email` was created because the `User` model in your Prisma schema is using the [`@unique`](https://www.prisma.io/docs/orm/reference/prisma-schema-reference#unique) attribute on its `email` field.

CREATE UNIQUE INDEX "User_email_key" ON "User"("email");
```

> You now need to use the `wrangler d1 execute`  command to send this SQL statement to D1. Note that this command accepts two options:

Author: Ha, good callout! I adjusted the content to have the following flow:

1. create empty migration with `npx wrangler d1 migrations create prisma-demo-db create_user_table`
1. add `model User` to Prisma schema
1. generate SQL statement into migration file: `npx prisma migrate diff --from-empty --to-schema-datamodel ./prisma/schema.prisma --script > migrations/0001_create_user_table.sql`
1. apply migrations locally and remotely with `npx wrangler d1 migrations apply prisma-demo-db`

- `--remote`: Executes the statement against your _remote_ version of D1. This version is used by your _deployed_ Cloudflare Workers. Learn more [here](/d1/configuration/remote-development/).

In this tutorial, you'll do both: test the Worker locally _and_ deploy it afterwards. So, you need to run both commands. Open your terminal and paste the following commands:

```
# For the local database
npx wrangler d1 execute prisma-demo-db --file=prisma/schema.sql --local

# For the remote database
npx wrangler d1 execute prisma-demo-db --file=prisma/schema.sql --remote
```

Let's also create some dummy data that we can query once the Worker is running. This time, you'll run the SQL statement without storing it in a file:

```
# For the local database
npx wrangler d1 execute prisma-demo-db --command "INSERT INTO  \"User\" (\"email\", \"name\") VALUES
('jane@prisma.io', 'Jane Doe (Local)');" --local

# For the remote database
npx wrangler d1 execute prisma-demo-db --command "INSERT INTO  \"User\" (\"email\", \"name\") VALUES
('jane@prisma.io', 'Jane Doe (Remote)');" --remote
```

### 5. Query your database from the Worker

> In order to query your database from the Worker using Prisma ORM, you need to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To query your database from the Worker using Prisma ORM, you need to:
```

1. Add `DB` to the `Env` interface.
2. Instantiate `PrismaClient` using the `PrismaD1` driver adapter.
3. Send a query using Prisma Client and return the result.

Open `src/index.ts` and replace the entire content with the following:

```ts
---
filename: src/index.ts
---
import { PrismaClient } from '@prisma/client'
import { PrismaD1 } from '@prisma/adapter-d1'

export interface Env {
  DB: D1Database
}

export default {
	async fetch(request: Request, env: Env, ctx: ExecutionContext): Promise<Response> {
    const adapter = new PrismaD1(env.DB)
    const prisma = new PrismaClient({ adapter })

    const users = await prisma.user.findMany()
    const result = JSON.stringify(users)
    return new Response(result);
		},
};

```

Before running the Worker, you need to generate Prisma Client with the following command:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sh
```

> npx prisma generate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ npx prisma generate
```

```

### 6. Run the Worker locally

> With the database query in place and Prisma Client generated, you can go ahead and run the Worker locally:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you have the database query in place and Prisma Client generated, run the Worker locally:
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sh
```

> npm run dev

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ npm run dev
```

```

> Now you can open your browser at [`http://localhost:8787`](http://localhost:8787/) to see the result of the database query:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open your browser at [`http://localhost:8787`](http://localhost:8787/) to check the result of the database query:
```

```json
---
filename: Browser output
---
[{"id":1,"email":"jane@prisma.io","name":"Jane Doe (Local)"}]
```

### 7. Deploy the Worker

> To deploy the Worker, run the the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To deploy the Worker, run the following command:
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sh
```

> npm run deploy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ npm run deploy
```

```

> As before, your deployed Worker is accessible via `https://prisma-d1-example.USERNAME.workers.dev`. If you navigate your browser to that URL, you should see the following data that's queried from your remote D1 database:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Access your Worker at `https://prisma-d1-example.USERNAME.workers.dev`. Your browser should display the following data queried from your remote D1 database:
```

```json
---
filename: Browser output
---
[{"id":1,"email":"jane@prisma.io","name":"Jane Doe (Remote)"}]
```

Congratulations, you just deployed a Cloudflare Worker using D1 as a database and querying it via Prisma ORM 🎉

> ## Next steps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Related resources
```

> Here are some more useful resources to check out if you want to learn more about Prisma ORM:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> - **Docs**: [Get started with Prisma ORM](https://www.prisma.io/docs/getting-started)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Prisma documentation](https://www.prisma.io/docs/getting-started).
```

> - **Help**: Open a new [GitHub Discussion](https://github.com/prisma/prisma/discussions/) or [ask the AI bot in the Prisma docs](https://www.prisma.io/docs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- To get help, open a new [GitHub Discussion](https://github.com/prisma/prisma/discussions/), or [ask the AI bot in the Prisma docs](https://www.prisma.io/docs).
```

> - **Examples**: [Ready-to-run examples using Prisma ORM](https://github.com/prisma/prisma-examples/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Ready-to-run examples using Prisma ORM](https://github.com/prisma/prisma-examples/).
```

> - **Community**: Check out the [Prisma community](https://www.prisma.io/community), follow [Prisma on X](https://www.x.com/prisma) and join the [Prisma Discord](https://pris.ly/discord)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check out the [Prisma community](https://www.prisma.io/community), follow [Prisma on X](https://www.x.com/prisma) and join the [Prisma Discord](https://pris.ly/discord).
```

> - **Blog**: [Developer Experience Redefined: Prisma & Cloudflare Lead the Way to Data DX](https://www.prisma.io/blog/cloudflare-partnership-qerefgvwirjq)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Developer Experience Redefined: Prisma & Cloudflare Lead the Way to Data DX](https://www.prisma.io/blog/cloudflare-partnership-qerefgvwirjq)
```

---
type: example
summary: Learn how to query D1 using Prisma ORM from a Cloudflare Worker.
tags:
  - Prisma ORM
  - D1
pcx_content_type: configuration
title: Query D1 using Prisma ORM
weight: 3
layout: example

> ---

Author: Ah I see! I'll move it under `tutorials` then. FWIW, we'll be adding an actual deployment example with D1 to our `prisma-examples` repo as well. Maybe we can describe that in the `examples` directory.

Next, you will create a database table in the database to send queries to D1 using Prisma ORM.

### 4. Create a table in the database

[Prisma Migrate](https://www.prisma.io/docs/orm/prisma-migrate/understanding-prisma-migrate/overview) does not support D1 yet, so you cannot follow the default migration workflows using `prisma migrate dev` or `prisma db push`.

However, D1 comes with its own [migration system](/d1/reference/migrations) and the Prisma CLI provides tools that still allow you to generate SQL statements for schema changes. In the following, you'll use both D1's migration system and the Prisma CLI to create and run a migration against your database.

First, create a new migration using the `wrangler` CLI:

```sh
$ npx wrangler d1 migrations create prisma-demo-db create_user_table
```

When prompted if the command can create a new folder called `migrations`, hit **Enter** to confirm.

> The command has now created a new directory called `migrations` and an empty file called `0001_create_user_table.sql` inside of it:

Author: can you double-check this suggestion? I think the sentence becomes factually incorrect with it?

> ```

Author: can you double-check this suggestion? the code snippet displays the structure on the file system and is not a sql code snippet.

migrations/
└── 0001_create_user_table.sql
```

Next, you need to add the SQL statement that will create a `User` table to that file.

Open the `schema.prisma` file and add the following `User` model to your schema:

```diff
---
filename: prisma/schema.prisma
---
+model User {
+  id    Int     @id @default(autoincrement())
+  email String  @unique
+  name  String?

> +}

Author: they were intentional. in combination with the `diff` language annotation, it renders the lines prefixes with a `+` in green, e.g. this markdown:

````
```diff
+model User {
+  id    Int     @id @default(autoincrement())
+  email String  @unique
+  name  String?
+}
```
````

is rendered as followed:

```diff
+model User {
+  id    Int     @id @default(autoincrement())
+  email String  @unique
+  name  String?
+}
```

it's a small detail though and I think we can also remove them (since they may cause some friction when people directly copy the content of this code block).

```

Now, run the following command in your terminal to generate the SQL statement that creates a `User` table equivalent to the `User` model above:

```sh
$ npx prisma migrate diff --from-empty --to-schema-datamodel ./prisma/schema.prisma --script > migrations/0001_create_user_table.sql
```

This stores a SQL statement to create a new `User` table in your migration file from before, here is what it looks like:

```sql
---
filename: migrations/0001_create_user_table.sql
---
-- CreateTable
CREATE TABLE "User" (
    "id" INTEGER NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT,
    "email" TEXT NOT NULL,
    "name" TEXT
);

-- CreateIndex
CREATE UNIQUE INDEX "User_email_key" ON "User"("email");
```

> Note that the `UNIQUE INDEX` on the `email` was created because the `User` model in your Prisma schema is using the [`@unique`](https://www.prisma.io/docs/orm/reference/prisma-schema-reference#unique) attribute on its `email` field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`UNIQUE INDEX` on `email` was created because the `User` model in your Prisma schema is using the [`@unique`](https://www.prisma.io/docs/orm/reference/prisma-schema-reference#unique) attribute on its `email` field.
```

You now need to use the `wrangler d1 migrations apply` command to send this SQL statement to D1. This command accepts two options:

- `--local`: Executes the statement against a _local_ version of D1. This local version of D1 is a SQLite database file that will be located in the `.wrangler/state` directory of your project. Use this approach when you want to develop and test your Worker on your local machine. Refer to [Local development](/d1/configuration/local-development/) to learn more.
- `--remote`: Executes the statement against your _remote_ version of D1. This version is used by your _deployed_ Cloudflare Workers. Refer to [Remote development](/d1/configuration/remote-development/) to learn more.

In this tutorial, you will do local and remote development. You will test the Worker locally and deploy your Worker afterwards. Open your terminal, and run both commands:

```sh
# For the local database
$ npx wrangler d1 migrations apply prisma-demo-db --local
```

```sh
# For the remote database
$ npx wrangler d1 migrations apply prisma-demo-db --remote
```

> Hit **Enter** both times when you're prompted to confirm that the migration should be applied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Select **Enter** both times when you are prompted to confirm that the migration should be applied.
```

$ npx wrangler d1 execute prisma-demo-db --command "INSERT INTO  \"User\" (\"email\", \"name\") VALUES
('jane@prisma.io', 'Jane Doe (Local)');" --local
```

```sh
# For the remote database
$ npx wrangler d1 execute prisma-demo-db --command "INSERT INTO  \"User\" (\"email\", \"name\") VALUES
('jane@prisma.io', 'Jane Doe (Remote)');" --remote
```

### 5. Query your database from the Worker

To query your database from the Worker using Prisma ORM, you need to:

1. Add `DB` to the `Env` interface.
2. Instantiate `PrismaClient` using the `PrismaD1` driver adapter.
3. Send a query using Prisma Client and return the result.

Open `src/index.ts` and replace the entire content with the following:

```ts
---
filename: src/index.ts
---
import { PrismaClient } from '@prisma/client'
import { PrismaD1 } from '@prisma/adapter-d1'

export interface Env {
  DB: D1Database
}

export default {
	async fetch(request: Request, env: Env, ctx: ExecutionContext): Promise<Response> {
    const adapter = new PrismaD1(env.DB)
    const prisma = new PrismaClient({ adapter })

    const users = await prisma.user.findMany()
    const result = JSON.stringify(users)
    return new Response(result);
		},
};

```

> Before running the Worker, you need to generate Prisma Client with the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before running the Worker, generate Prisma Client with the following command:
```

```sh
$ npx prisma generate
```

### 6. Run the Worker locally

Now that you have the database query in place and Prisma Client generated, run the Worker locally:

```sh
$ npm run dev
```

Open your browser at [`http://localhost:8787`](http://localhost:8787/) to check the result of the database query:

```json
---
filename: Browser output
---
[{"id":1,"email":"jane@prisma.io","name":"Jane Doe (Local)"}]
```

### 7. Deploy the Worker

To deploy the Worker, run the following command:

```sh
$ npm run deploy
```

Access your Worker at `https://prisma-d1-example.USERNAME.workers.dev`. Your browser should display the following data queried from your remote D1 database:

```json
---
filename: Browser output
---
[{"id":1,"email":"jane@prisma.io","name":"Jane Doe (Remote)"}]
```

> Congratulations, you just deployed a Cloudflare Worker using D1 as a database and querying it via Prisma ORM 🎉

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By finishing this tutorial, you have deployed a Cloudflare Worker using D1 as a database and querying it via Prisma ORM.
```

## Related resources

- [Prisma documentation](https://www.prisma.io/docs/getting-started).

> -  To get help, open a new [GitHub Discussion](https://github.com/prisma/prisma/discussions/), or [ask the AI bot in the Prisma docs](https://www.prisma.io/docs).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- To get help, open a new [GitHub Discussion](https://github.com/prisma/prisma/discussions/), or [ask the AI bot in the Prisma docs](https://www.prisma.io/docs).
```
